
Public Law 89-272 
AN ACT 
To amend the Clean Air Act to require standards for controlling the emission of pollutants from certain motor vehicles, to authorize a research and development program with respect to solid-waste disposal, and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled. 
TITLE I—AMENDMENTS TO CLEAN AIR A("T 
SEC. 101. The Clean Air Act is amended (1) by hiserting immediately above the heading of section 1: "TITLE I—AIR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL"; (2) by changing the words "this Act" wherever they appear in sections 1 through 7 to "this title"; (3) by redesignating sections 1 through 7 and references thereto as sections 101 through 107; (4) by redesignating sections 8 through 14 and references thereto as sections 301 through 307; (5) by inserting immediately above the heading of the so redesignated section 301: "TITTLE III--GENERAL"; (6) by striking out subsection (a) of the so redesignated section 306 and striking out the letter (b) at the beginning of subsection (b) in the so redesignated section 306; (7) by striking out "this Act" in the so redesignated section 306 and inserting in lieu thereof "title I"; and (8) by inserting after the so redesigiiated section 107 and before the heading of such title III the following new title: 
"TITLE II—CONTROL OF AIR POLLUTION FROAf MOTOR VEHICLES 
"SHORT TITLE 
iigj,^, 201. This title may be cited as the 'Motor Vehicle Air Pollu• /^ , i i ,* "^ 
tioii Control Act. 
"ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDAKns "SEC. 202. (a) The Secretary shall by regulation, giving appro
priate consideration to technological feivsibility and economic costs, prescribe as soon as practicable standards, applicable to the emission of any kind of substance, from any class or classes of new mot,or vehicles or new motor vehicle engines, which in his judgment cause or contribute to, or are likely to cause or to contribute to, air pollution which endangers the health or welfare of any persons, and such standards shall apply to such vehicles or engines whether they are designe<l 
Motor Vehicle AirPollution Control Act. 

79 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 89-272-OCT. 20, 1965 993 
as complete systems or incorporate other devices to ])i'eveiit or control such pollution. 
"(b) Any regulations initially prescribed under tliis section, and amendments thereto, with respect to any class of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines shall become effective on the effective date specified in the order promulgating such regulations which date shall be determhied by the Secretary after consideration of tlie period reasonably ne<'e.ssary for industry compliance. 
"SEC. 203. (a) The following acts and the causing thereof are prohibited— 
"(1) in the case of a manufacturer of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines for distribution in conmierce, the manufacture for sale, the sale, or the offering for sale, or the introduction or delivery for introduction into commerce, or the importation into the United States for sale or resale, of any new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine, manufactured after the effective date of regulations under this title which are applicable to such vehicle or engine unless it is in conformity with regulations prescribed under section 202 (except as provided in subsection ( b ) ) ; 
"(2) for any person to fail or refuse to permit access to or copying of records or to fail to make reports or provide information, required under section 207; or 
" (3) for any person to remove or render inoperative any device or element of design installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine in compliance with regulations under this title prior to its sale and delivery to the ultimate purchaser. 
Effective date. 
"(b) (1) The Secretary may exempt any new motor vehicle or new ^^^^^^^''°'^ motor vehicle engine, or class thereof, from subsection (a), upon such terms and conditions as he may find necessary to protect the public health or welfare, for the purpose of research, investigations, studies, demonstrations, or training, or for reasons of national security. 
"(2) A new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine offered for ^eh'{'^,°/s^*^°" °^ importation by a manufacturer in violation of subsection (a) shall be refused admission into the United States, but the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare 
may, by joint regulation, provide for deferring final determination as to admission and authorizing the delivery of such a motor vehicle or engine offered for import to the owner or consignee thereof upon such terms and conditions (including the furnishing of a bond) as may appear to them appropriate to insure that any such motor vehicle or engme will be brought into conformity with the standards, requirements, and limitations applicable to it under this title. The Secretary of the Treasury shall, if a motor vehicle or engine is finally refused admission under this paragraph, cause disposition thereof in accordance with the customs laws unless it is exported, under regulations prescribed by such Secretary, within ninety days of the date of notice of such refusal or such additional time as may be permitted pursuant to such regulations, except that disposition in accordance with the customs laws may not be made in such manner as may result, directly or indirectly, in the sale, to the ultimate consumer, of a new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine that fails to comply with applicable standards of the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare 
under this title. "(3) A new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine intended h-?iTs^"°" °^ 
solely for export, and so labeled or tagged on the outside of the container and on the vehicle or, engine itself, shall not be subject to the provisions of subsection ( a ) . 

994 
PUBLIC LAW 89-272-OCT. 20, 1965 [79 STAT. 
ii-t 
"SEC. 204. (a) The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to restrain violations of paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of section 203 (a). 
"(b) Actions to restrain such violations shall be brought by and in the name of the United States. In any such action, subpenas for witnesses who are required to attend a district court in any district may run into any other district. 
"PENAL TIES 
"SEC. 205. Any person who violates paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of section 203 (a) shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000. Such violation with respect to section 203(a) (1) and 203(a) (3) shall constitute a separate offense with respect to each new motor vehicle or new motor, vehicle engine. 
"CERTIFICA TION 
"SEC. 206. (a) Upon application of the manufacturer, the Secretary shall test, or require to be tested, in such manner as he deems appropriate, any new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine submitted by such manufacturer to determine whether such vehicle or engine conforms with the regulations prescribed under section 202 of this title. If such vehicle or engine conforms to such regulations the Secretary shall issue a certificate of conformity, upon such terms, and for such period not less than one year, as he may prescribe. 
"(b) Any new motor vehicle or any motor vehicle engine sold by such manufacturer which is in all material respects substantially the same construction as the test vehicle or engine for which a certificate has been issued under subsection (a), shall for the purposes of this Act be deemed to be in conformity with the regulations issued under section 202 of this title. 
uRECORDS AND REPORTS 
"SEC. 207. (a) Every manufacturer shall establish and maintain such records, make such reports, and provide such information, as the Secretary may reasonably require to enable him to determine whether such manufacturer has acted or is acting in compliance with this title and regulations thereunder and shall, upon request of an officer or employee duly designated by the Secretary, permit such officer or employee at reasonable times, to have access to and copy such records. 
iCQ^>^ ^ j j information reported or otherwise obtained by the Secre^ ^ ^ ^^ ^^^ representative pursuant to subsection (a), which information contains or relates to a trade secret or other matter referred to in scctiou 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code, shall be considered confidential for the purpose of such section 1905, except that such information may be disclosed to other officers or employees concerned with carrying out this Act or when relevant in any proceeding under this Act. Nothing in this section shall authorize the withholding of information by the Secretary or any officer or employee under his control, from the duly authorized committees of the Congress. 
((DEFINITIONS FOR TITLE II 
"SEC. 208. As used in this title— 
"(1) The term 'manufacturer' means any person engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines, or importing such vehicles or engines for resale, or who acts for and is under the control of any such person in connection with the distribution of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle 
corrfidentiai iiv jrma on. 
62 Stat. 791. 
'INJUNCTION PROCEEDINGS 

79 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 89-272-OCT. 20, 1965 
engines, but shall not include any dealer with respect to new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines received by him in commerce. "(2) The term 'motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle designed for transporting persons or property on a street or highway. 
"(3) The term 'new motor vehicle' means a motor vehicle the equitable or legal title to which has never been transferred to an ultimate purchaser; and the term 'new motor vehicle engine' means an engine m a new motor vehicle or a motor vehicle engine the equitable or legal title to which has never been transferred to the ultimate purchaser. 
" (4) The term 'dealer' means any person who is engaged in the sale or tne distribution of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines to the ultimate purchaser. 
"(6) The term 'ultimate purchaser' means, with respect to any new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine, the first person who in good faith purchases such new motor vehicle or new engine for purposes other than resale. 
"(6) The term 'commerce' means (A) commerce between any place in any State and any place outside thereof; and (B) commerce wholly within the District of Columbia. 
((APPROPRIA TIONS 
"SEC. 209. There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title II, not to exceed $470,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1966, not to exceed $845,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1967, not to exceed $1,196,000 for the fiscal year'ending June 30,1968, and not to exceed $1,470,()00 for the fiscal year ending June 30j 1969." 
SEC. 102. (a) Paragraph (1) of subsection (c) of the redesignated section 106 of the Clean Air Act (which relates to abatement of air pollution) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: 
995 
Foreign countries endangered studies from any duly constituted international agency, has reason byair poiTu'tion, 
"(D) Whenever the Secretary, upon receipt of reports, surveys, or 
to believe that any pollution referred to in subsection (a) which endangers the health or welfare of persons in a foreign country is occurring, or whenever the Secretary of State requests him to do so with respect to such pollution which the Secretary of State alleges is of such a nature, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare shall give formal notification thereof to the air pollution control agency of the municipality where such discharge or discharges originate, to the air pollution control agency of the State in which such municipality is located, and to the interstate air pollution control agency, if any, in the jurisdictional area of which such municipality is located, and shall call promptly a conference of such agency or agencies. The Secretary shall invite the foreign country which may be adversely affected by the pollution to attend and participate in the conference, and the representative of such country shall, for the purpose of the conference and any further proceeding resulting from such conference, have all the rights of a State air pollution control a^ncy. This subRestriction. paragraph shall apply only to a foreign country which the Secretary 
determines has given the United States essentially the same rights with respect to the prevention or control of air pollution occurring in that country as is given that country by this subparagraph." 
(b) So much of section (f) of such redesignated section 105 as precedes clause (2) of such subsection is amended to read as follows: 
"(f) If action reasonably calculated to secure abatement of the Judicialpropollution within the time specified in the notice following the public '=*^'*'"s^hearing is not taken, the Secretary— 
"(1) in the case of pollution of air which is endangering the health or welfare of persons (A) in a State other than that in which the discharge or discharges (causing or contributing to 
^j ^'sc li^y 42use 1857d. 

996 Ante, p. 995. 
77 Stat. 394. 42 use 1857b. 
Research programs. 
PUBLIC LAW 89-272-OCT. 20, 1965 [79 STAT. 
such pollution) originate, or (B) in a foreign country which has participated in a conference called under subparagraph (D) of subsection (c) of this section and in all proceedings under this section resulting from such conference, may request the Attorney General to oring a suit on behalf oi the United States to secure abatement of the pollution, and". 
SEC. 103. Eedesignated section 103 of the Clean Air Act (which relates to research, investigations, and training) is amended— 
(1) by striking out the word "and" at the end of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) thereof; 
(2) by striking out the period at the end of paragraph (4) of subsection (a) thereof and inserting in lieu thereof "; and"; (3) by adding after paragraph (4) of subsection (a) thereof 
the following new paragraph (6) : "(5) conduct and accelerate research programs (A) relating 
to the means of controlling hydrocarbon emissions resulting from the evaporation of gasoline in carburetors and fuel tanks, and the means of controlling emissions of oxides of nitrogen and aldehydes from gasoline-powered or diesel-powered vehicles, and to carry out such research the Secretary snail consult with the technical committee established under section 106 of this Act, and for research concerning diesel-powered vehicles he may add to such committee such representatives from the diesel-powered vehicle industry as he deems appropriate; and (B) directed toward the development of improved low-cost techniques designed to reduce emissions of oxides of sulfur produced by the combus
tion of sulfur-containing fuels."; and (4) by adding at the end of such section the following new
subsections : "(d) The Secretary is authorized to construct such facilities and 
staff and equip them as he determines to be necessary to carry out his functions under this Act. 
" (e) If, in the judgment of the Secretary, an air pollution problem of substantial significance may result from discharge or discharges into the atmosphere, he may call a conference concerning this potential air pollution problem to be held in or near one or more of the places where such discharge or discharges are occurring or will occur. All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard at such conference, either orally or in writing, and shall be permitted to appear in person or by representative in accordance with procedures prescribed by the Secretary. If the Secretary finds, on the basis of the evidence presented at such conference, that the discharge or discharges if permitted to take place or continue are likely to cause or contribute to air pollution subject to abatement under section 105(a), he shall send such findings, together with recommendations concerning the measures which he finds reasonable and suitable to prevent such pollution, to the person or persons whose actions will result in the discharge or discharges involved; to air pollution agencies of the State or States and of the municipality or municipalities where such discharge or discharges will originate; and to the interstate air pollution control a^ncy, if any, in the jurisdictional area of which any such municipality is located. Such findings and recommendations shall be advisory only, but shall be admitted, together with the record of the conference, as part of the record of proceedings under subsections (c), (d), and (e) of section 10.5." 
42 u s e 
1857e. 
Construction of facilities, etc. 
Potential air pollution problems. 
42use 1857d. 

79 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 89-272-OCT. 20, 1965 TITLE II—SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL 
SHORT TITLE 
SEC. 201. This title (hereinafter referred to as "this Act") may be cited as the "Solid Waste Disposal Act". 
riNDINGS AND PURPOSES 
SEC. 202. (a) The Confess finds— (1) that the continuing technological progress and improve
ment in methods of manufacture, packaging, and marketing of consumer products has resulted in an ever-mounting increase, and in a change in the characteristics, of the mass of material discarded by the purchaser of such products; 
(2) that the economic and population growth of our Nation, and the improvements in the standard of living enjoyed by our population, have required increased industrial production to meet our needs, and have made necessary the demolition of old buildings, the construction of new buildings, and the provision of highways and other avenues of transportation, which, together with related industrial, commercial, and agricultural operations, have resulted in a rising tide of scrap, discarded, and waste materials; 
(3) that the continuing concentration of our population in expanding metropolitan and other urban areas has presented these communities with serious financial, management, intergovernmental, and technical problems in the disposal of solid wastes resulting from the industrial, commercial, domestic, and other activities carried on in such areas; 
(4) that inefficient and improper methods of disposal of solid wastes result in scenic blights, create serious hazards to the public health, including pollution of air and water resources, accident hazards, and increase in rodent and insect vectors of disease, have an adverse effect on land values, create public nuisances, otherwise interfere with community life and development; 
(5) that the failure or inability to salvage and reuse such materials economically results in the unnecessary waste and depletion of our natural resources; and 
(6) that while the collection and disposal of solid wastes should continue to be primarily the function of State, regional, and local agencies, the problems of waste disposal as set forth above have become a matter national in scope and in concern and necessitate Federal action through financial and technical assistance and leadership in the development, demonstration, and application of new and improved methods and processes to reduce the amount of waste and unsalvageable materials and to provide for proper and economical solid-waste disposal practices. 
(b) The purposes of this Act therefore are— (1) to initiate and accelerate a national research and develop
ment program for new and improved methods of proper and economic solid-waste disposal, including studies directed toward the conservation of natural resources by reducing the amount of waste and unsalvageable materials and by recovery and utilization of potential resources in solid wastes; and 
(2) to provide technical and financial assistance to State and local governments and interstate agencies in the planning, development, and conduct of solid-waste disposal programs. 
997 
Di?o"ai^Act*" isposa 

998 
PUBLIC LAW 89-272-OCT. 20, 1965 [79 STAT. DEFINITIONS 
SEC. 203. When used in this Act— (1) The term "Secretary" means the Secretary of Health, Educa
tion, and Welfare; except that such term means the Secretary of the Interior with respect to problems of solid waste resulting from the extraction, processing, or utilization of minerals or fossil fuels where the generation, production, or reuee of such waste is or may be controlled within the extraction, processing, or utilization facility or facilities and where such control is a feature of the technology or economy of the operation of such facility or facilities. 
(2) The term "State" means a State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Kico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa. 
(3) The term "interstate agency" means an agency of two or more municipalities in different States, or an agency established by two or more States, with authority to provide for the disposal of solid wastes and serving two or more municipalities located in different States. 
(4) The term "solid waste" means garbage, refuse, and other discarded solid materials, including solid-waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial, and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or other common water pollutants. 
(5) The term "solid-waste disposal" means the collection, storage, treatment, utilization, processing, or final disposal of solid waste. 
(6) The term "construction", with respect to any project of construction under this Act, means (A) the erection or building of new structures and acquisition of lands or interests therein, or the acquisition, replacement, expansion, remodeling, alteration, modernization, or extension of existing structures, and (B) the acquisition and installation of initial equipment of, or required in connection with, new or newly acquired structures or the expanded, remodeled, altered, modernized or extended part of existing structures (including trucks and other motor vehicles, and tractors, cranes, and other machinery) necessary for the proper utilization and operation of the facility after completion of the project; and includes preliminary planning to determine the economic and engineering feasibility and the public health and safety aspects of the project, the engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal, and economic investigations and studies, and any surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, and other action necessary for the carrying out of the project, and (C) the inspection 
and supervision of the process of carrying out the project to completion. 
RESEARCH, DEMONSTRATIONS, TRAINING, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES 
SEC. 204. (a) The Secretary shall conduct, and encourage, cooperate with, and render financial and other assistance to appropriate public (whether Federal, State, interstate, or local) authorities, agencies, and institutions, private agencies and institutions, and individuals 
in the conduct of, and promote the coordination of, research, investigations, experiments, training, demonstrations, surveys, and studies relating to the operation and financing of solid-waste disposal programs, the development and application of new and improved methods of solid-waste disposal (including devices and facilities therefor), 

79 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 89-272-OCT. 20, 1965 
999 
and the reduction of the amount of such waste and unsalvag^able wast© materials. 
(b) In carrying out the provisions of the preceding subsection, the Secretary is authorized to— 
(1) collect and make available, through publications and other appropriate means, the results of, and other information pertaining to, such research and other activities, including appropropriate recommendations in connection therewith; 
(2) cooperate with public and private agencies, institutions, and organizations, and with any industries involved, in the preparation and the conduct of such research and other activities; and 
(3) make grants-in-aid to public or private agencies and institutions and to individuals for research, training projects, surveys, and demonstrations (including construction of facilities) , and provide for the conduct of research, training, surveys, and demonstrations by contract with public or private agencies and institutions and with individuals; and such contracts for research or demonstrations or both (including contracts for construction) may be made in accordance with and subject to the limitations provided with respect to research contracts of the military departments in title 10, United States Code, section 235S, except that the determination, approval, and certification required thereby shall be made by the Secretary. 
(c) Any grant, agreement, or contract made or entered into under tliis section shall contain provisions effective to insure that all information, uses, processes, patents and other developments resulting from any activity undertaken pursuant to such ^rant, agreement, or contract will be made readily available on fair and equitable terms to industries utilizing methods of solid-waste disposal and industries engaging in furnishing devices, facilities, equipment, and supplies to be used m connection wiui solid-waste disposal. In carrying out the provisions of this section, the Secretary and each department, agency, and officer of the Federal Government having functions or duties under this Act shall make use of and adhere to the Statement of Government, I'atent Policy which was promulgated by the President in his memorandum of October 10, 1963. (3 CFE, 1963 Supp., p. 238.) 
^^A stat. 134. 
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the L^nited Limitation, States shall not make any grant to pay more than two-thirds of the cost of construction of any facility under this Act. 
INTERSTATE AND INTERLOCAL COOPERATION 
SEC. 205. The Secretary shall encourage cooperative activities by the States and local governments in connection with solid-waste disI)osal programs; encourage, where practicable, interstate, interlocal, and regional planning for, and the conduct of, interstate, interlocal, and regional solid-waste disposal programs; and encourage the enactment of improved and, so far as practicable, uniform State and local laws governing solid-waste disposal. 
GRANITS FOR STATE AND INTERSTATE PLANNING 
SEC. 206. (a) The Secretary may from time to time, upon such tenns and conditions consistent with this section as he finds appropriate to carry out the purposes of this Act, make grants to State and interstate agencies of not to exceed 50 per centum of the cost of making survej^s of solid-waste disposal practices and problems within the jurisdictional 

1000 Applications. 
PUBLIC LAW 89-272~OCT. 20, 1965 [79 STAT. 
areas of such States or agencies, and of developing solid-waste disposal plans for such areas. 
(^^ jj^ Order to be eligible for a grant under this section the State, or the interstate agency, must submit an application therefor which— (1) designates or establishes a single State agency (which may be an interdepartmental agency) or, in the case of an interstate agency, such interstate agency, as the sole agency for carry
ing out the purposes of this section; (2) indicates the manner in which provision will be made to 
assure full consideration of all aspects of planning essential to statewide planning (or in the case of an interstate agency jurisdictionwide planning) for proper and effective solid-waste disposal consistent with the protection of the public health, including such factors as population growth, urban and metropolitan development, land use planning, water pollution control, air pollution control, and the feasibility of regional disposal programs; 
(3) sets forth its plans for expenditure of such grant, which plans provide reasonable assurance of carrying out the purposes of this section; 
(4) provides for submission of a final report of the activities of the State or interstate agency in carrying out the purposes of this section, and for the submission of such other reports, in such form and containing such information, as the Secretary may from time to time find necessary for carrying out the purposes of this section and for keeping such records and affording such access thereto as he may find necessary to assure the correctness and verification of such reports; and 
(5) provides for such fiscal-control and fund-accounting procedures as may be necessary to assure proper disbursement of and accounting for funds paid to the State or interstate agency under this section. 
(c) The Secretary shall make a grant under this section only if he finds that there is satisfactory assurance that the planning of solid-wast© disposal will be coordinated, so far as practicable, with other related State, interstate, regional, and local planning activities, including those financed in part with funds pursuant to section 701 
of the Houslug Act of 1954. *= 
LABOR ST ANDARDS 
SEC, 207. No grant for a project of construction under this Act shall be made unless the Secretary finds that the application contains or is supported by reasonable assurance that all laborers and mechanics employed by contractors or subcontractors on projects of the type covered by the Davis-Bacon Act, as amended (40 U.S.C. 276a— 276a-5), wlU be paid wages at rates not less than those prevailing on similar work in the locality as determined by the Secretary of Labor in accordance with that Act; and the Secretary of Labor shall have with respect to the labor standards specified in this section the authority and functions set forth in Reorganization Plan Numbered 
14 of 1950 (15 F.R. 3176; 5 U.S.C. 133z-15) and section 2 of the Act of Juue 13,1934, as amended (40 U.S.C. 276c). 
OTHER AUTHORITY NOT AFFECTED 
SEC. 208. This Act shall not be construed as superseding or limiting the authorities and responsibilities, under any other provisions of law, of the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, the 
73 Stat. 678; 
Ante, pp. 17, 502. 40 use 461. 
49 Stat. 1011; 
64Stat. 1267. 63 Stat. 108. 

79 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 89-272-OCT. 20, 1965 1001 
Secretary of the Interior, or any other Federal officer, department, or agency. 
PAYMENTS 
SEC. 209. Payments of grants imder this Act may be made (after necessary adjustment on account of previously made underpayments or overpayments) in advance or by way of reimbursement, and in such installments and on such conditions as the Secretary may determine. 
APPROPRIATIONS 
SEC. 210. (a) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, to carry out this Act, not to exceed $7,000,000 for the fiscal year ending Jmie 30,1966, not to exceed $14,000,000 for the J&scal year ending June 30,1967, not to exceed $19,200,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30,1968, and not to exceed $20,000,000 for thefiscalyear ending June 30,1969. 
(b) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior, to carry out this Act, not to exceed $3,000,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30,1966, not to exceed $6,000,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30,1967, not to exceed $10,800,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30,1968, and not to exceed $12,500,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1969. 
Approved October 20, 1965, 9:10 a.m. 
49-850 0-66—66 
