
81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 Public Law 90-148 
AN ACT To amend' the Clean Air Act to authorize planning grants to air pollution con
trol agencies; expand research provisions relating to fuels and vehicles; provide for interstate air pollution control agencies or commissions; authorize the establishment of air quality standards, and for other purposes. 
485 
November 21, 1967 1^^'^^°] 
Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled^ That this Act may /"'" Quality Act be cited as the "Air Quality Act of 1967". 
SEC. 2. The Clean Air Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1857-18571), is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"TITLE I—AIR POLLUTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL 
aFINDINGS AND PUItPOSES 
"SEC. 101. (a) The Congress finds— "(1) that the predominant part of the Nation's population is 
located in its rapidly expanding metropolitan and other urban areas, which generally cross the boundary lines of local jurisdictions and often extend into two or more States; 
" (2) that the growth in the amount and complexity of air pollution brought about by urbanization, industrial development, and the increasing use of motor vehicles, has resulted in mounting dangers to the public health and welfare, including injury to agricultural crops and livestock, damage to and the deterioration of property, and hazards to air and ground transportation; 
"(3) that the prevention and control of air pollution at its source is the primary responsibility of States and local governments; and 
" (4) that Federal financial assistance and leadership is essential for the development of cooperative Federal, State, regional, and local programs to prevent and control air pollution. 
"(b) The purposes of this title are— "(1) to protect and enhance the quality of the Nation's air 
resources so as to promote the public health and welfare and the productive capacity of its population; 
" (2) to initiate and accelerate a national research and development program to achieve the prevention and control of air pollution; 
"(3) to provide technical and financial assistance to State and local governments in connection with the development and execution of their air pollution prevention and control programs; and 
"(4) to encourage and assist the development and operation of regional air pollution control programs. 
uCOOPERATIVE ACTIVITIES AND UNIFORM LAWS 
"SEC. 102. (a) The Secretary shall encourage cooperative activities by the States and local governments for the prevention and control of air pollution; encourage the enactment of improved and, so far as practicable in the li^ht of varying conditions and needs, uniform State and local laws relating to the prevention and control of air pollution; and encourage the making of agreements and compacts between States for the prevention and control of air pollution. 
"(b) The Secretary shall cooperate with and encourage cooperative activities by all Federal departments and agencies having functions relating to the prevention and control of air pollution, so as to assure 
j^st^.^^^'' 

486 
PUBLIC LAW 90-146-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. 
the utilization in the Federal air pollution control j)rogram of all appropriate and available facilities and resources withm the Federal Government. 
"(c) The consent of the Congress is hereby given to two or more States to negotiate and enter into agreements or compacts, not in conflict with any law or treaty of the United States, for (1) cooperative effort and mutual assistance for the prevention and control of air pollution and the enforcement of their respective laws relating thereto, and (2) the establishment of such agencies, joint or otherwise, as they may deem desirable for making effective such agreements or compacts. No such agreement or compact shall be binding or obligatory upon any State a party thereto unless and until it has been approved by Congress. It is the intent of Congress that no agreement or compact entered into between States after the date of enactment of the Air Quality Act of 1967, which relates to the control and abatement of air |)ollution in an air quality control region, shall provide for participation b}^ a State which is not included (in whole or in part) m such air quality control region. 
"RESEARCH, INVESTIGATIONS, TRAINING, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES 
"SEC. 103. (a) The Secretary shall establish a national research and development program for the prevention and control of air pollution and as part of such program shall— 
"(1) conduct, and promote the coordination and acceleration of, research, investigations, experiments, training, demonstrations, surveys, and studies relating to the causes, effects, extent, prevention, and control of air pollution; 
"(2) encourage, cooperate with, and render technical services and provide financial assistance to air pollution control agencies and other appropriate public or private agencies, institutions, and organizations, q,nd individuals in the conduct of such activities; 
"(3) conduct investigations and research and make surveys concerning any Specific i)rob]em of air pollution in cooperation with any air pollution control agency with a view to recommending a solutionof such problem, if he is requested to do so by such agency or if, in his judgment, such problem may affect any community or communities in a State other than that in which the source of the matter causing or contributing to the pollution is located; 
"(4) estaiblish technical advisory committees composed of recognized experts in various aspects of air pollution to assist in the examination and evaluation of research progress and proposals and to avoid duplication of research. 
"(b) In carrying out the provisions of the preceding subsection the Secretary is authorized to— 
"(1) collect and make available, through publications and other appropriate means, the results of and other information, including appropriate recommendations by him in connection therewith, pertaining to such research and other activities; 
"(2) cooperate with other P^ederal departments and agencies, with air pollution control agencies, with other public and private agencies, institutions, and organizations, and with any industries involved, in the j^reparation and conduct of such research and other activities; 
"(3) make grants to air pollution control agencies, to other public or nonprofit private agencies, institutions, and organizations, and to individuals, for purposes stated in subsection (a) 
(1) of this section; " (4) contract with public or private agencies, institutions, and 
organizations, and with individuals, without regard to sections 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 487 
3648 and 3709 of the Revised Statutes (31 U.S.C. 529; 41 U.S.C. 5); 
"(5) provide training for, and make training grants to, personnel of air pollution control agencies and other persons with suitable qualifications; 
" (6) establish and maintain research fellowships, in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and at public or nonprofit private educational institutions or research organizations; 
"(7) collect and disseminate, in cooperation with other Federal departments and agencies, and with other public or private agencies, institutions, and organizations having related responsibilities, basic data on chemical, physical, and biological effects of varying air quality and other information pertaining to air pollution and the prevention and control thereof; and 
"(8) develop effective and practical processes, methods, and prototype devices for the prevention or control of air pollution. "(c) In carrying out the provisions of subsection (a) of this section the Secretary shall conduct research on, and survey the results of other 
scientific studies on, the harmful effects on the health or welfare of persons by the various known air pollution agents (or combinations of agents). 
"(d) The Secretary is authorized to construct such facilities and staff and equip them as he determines to be necessary to carry out his functions under this Act. 
"(e) If, in the judgment of the Secretary, an air pollution problem of substantial significance may result from discharge or discharges into the atmosphere, he may call a conference concerning this potential air pollution problem to be held in or near one or more of the places where such discharge or discharges are occurring or will occur. All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard at such conference, either orally or in writing, and shall be permitted to appear in person or by representative m accordance with procedures prescribed by the Secretary. If the Secretary finds, on the basis of the evidence presented at such conference, that the discharge or discharges if permitted to take place or continue are likely to cause or contribute to air pollution subject to abatement under section 108(a), he shall send such findings, together w^ith recommendations concerning the measures which he finds reasonable and suitable to prevent such pollution, to the person or persons whose actions will result in the discharge or discharges involved; to air pollution agencies of the State or States and of the municipality or municipalities where such discharge or discharges will originate; and to the interstate air pollution control agency, if any, in the jurisdictional area of which any such municipality is located. Such findings and recommendations shall be advisory only, but shall be admitted together with the record of the conference, as part of the proceedings under subsections (d), 
(e), and (f) of section 108. 
"RESEARCH RELATING TO FUELS AND VEHICLES 
"SEC. 104. (a) The Secretary shall give special emphasis to research and development into new and improved methods, having industrywide application, for the prevention and control of air pollution resulting from the combustion of fuels. In furtherance of such research and development he shall— 
"(1) conduct and accelerate research programs directed toward development of improved, low-cost techniques for control of com

488 
PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. 
70A Stat. 134. Limitation. 
bustion byproducts of fuels, for removal of ix)tential pollutants from fuels, and for control of emissions from evaporation of fuels; " (2) provide for Federal grants to public or nonprofit agencies, institutions, and organizations and to individuals, and contracts with public or private agencies, institutions, or persons, for payment of (A) part of the cost of acquiring, constructing, or otherwise securing for research and development purposes, new or improved devices or methods having industrywide application of preventing or controlling discharges into the air of various types of pollutants; and (B) carrying out the other provisions of this section, without regard to sections 3648 and 3709 of the Revised Statutes (31 U.S.C. 529; 41 U.S.C. 5) : Provided, That research or demonstration contracts awarded pursuant to this subsection (including contracts for construction) may be made in accordance with, and subject to the limitations provided with respect to research contracts of the military departments in, section 2353 of ^j^jg jQ, United States Code, except that the determination, 
approval, and certification required thereby shall be made by the Secretary: Provided further, That no grant may be made under this paragraph in excess of $1,500,000; 
" (3) determine, by laboratory and pilot plant testing, the results of air pollution research and studies in order to develop new or improved processes and plant designs to the point where they can be demonstrated on a large and practical scale; 
"(4) construct, operate, and maintain, or assist in meeting the cost of the construction, operation, and maintenance of new or improved demonstration plants or processes which have promise of accomplishing the purposes of this Act; 
"(5) study new or improved methods for the recovery and marketing of commercially valuable byproducts resulting from the removal of pollutants. 
"(b) In carrying out the provisions of this section, the Secretary may— 
"(1) conduct and accelerate research and development of lowcost instrumentation techniques to facilitate determination of quantity and quality of air pollutant emissions, including, but not limited to, automotive emissions; 
"(2) utilize, on a reimbursable basis, the facilities of existing Federal scientific laboratories; 
"(3) establish and operate necessary facilities and test sites at which to carry on the research, testing, development, and programing necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section; 
"(4) acquire secret processes, technical data, inventions, patent applications, patents, licenses, and an interest in lands, plants, and facilities, and other property or rights by purchase, license, lease, or donation; and 
" (5) cause on-site inspections to be made of promising domestic and foreign projects, and cooperate and participate in their development in instances in which the purposes of the Act will be served thereby. 
«;^^^ YQY the purposes of this section there are authorized to be appropriated for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1968, $35,000,000, and for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1969, $90,000,000. Amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall remain available until expended. 
Appropriation. 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21,1967 489 "(JRAXTS FOR SUPl'OKT OF AIR POLLFTIOX PLAXXING AND CONTROL 
PROGRAMS 
''SEC. 105. (a) (1) The Secretary is authorized to make grants to air pollution control agencies in an amount up to two-thirds of the cost of planning, developing, establishing, or improving, and grants to such agencies in an amount up to one-half of the cost of maintaining, pro- grams for the prevention and control of air pollution and programs for the implementation of air quality standards authorized by this Act: Provided^ That the Secretary is authorized to make grants to air pollution control agencies within the meaning of sections 302(b) (2) and 302(b) {-i) in an amount up to three-fourths of the cost of plan- ning, developing, establishing, or improving and up to three-fifths of the cost of maintaining, regional air quality control programs. A s used ^"^^y^conlroi* in this subsection the term "regional air quality control program' means program." 
a program for the prevention and control of air pollution or the implementation of air quality standards programs as authorized by this Act, in an area that includes the areas of two or more municipalities \\ hether in the same or different States. 
"(2) Before approving any grant under this subsection to any air pollution control agency within the meaning of sections 302(b)(2) and 302(b) (4), the Secretary shall receive assurances that such agency provides for adequate representation of api)ropriate State, interstate, local, and (when appropriate) international, interests in the air quality control region. 
" (3) Before approving any planning grant under this subsection to any air pollution control agency within the meaning of sections 302 (b)(2) and 302(b)(4), the Secretary shall receive assurances that such agency has the capability of developing a comprehensive air quality plan for the air quality control region, which plan shall include (when appropriate) a recommended system of alerts to avert and reduce the risk of situations in which there may be imminent and serious danger to the public health or welfare from air pollutants and the various aspects relevant to the establishment of air quality standards for such air quality control region, including the concentration of industries, other commercial establishments, population and natu
rally occurring factors which shall affect such standards. "•(b) From the sums available for the purposes of subsection (a) of this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall from time to time make grants to air pollution control agencies upon such terms and 
conditions as the Secretary may find necessary to carry out the purpose of this section. In establishing regulations for the granting of such funds the Secretary shall, so far as practicable, give due consideration to (1) the population, (2) the extent of the actual or potential air pollution problem, and (3) the financial need of the respective agencies. No agency shall receive any grant under this section during any fiscal year when its expenditures of non-Federal funds for other than nonrecurrent expenditures for air pollution control programs will be less than its expenditures were for such programs during the preceding fiscal year; and no agency shall receive any grant under this section with respect to the maintenance of a program for the prevention and control of air pollution unless the Secretary is satisfied that such grant will be so used as to supplement and, to the extent practicable, increase the level of State, local, or other non-Federal funds that would in the absence of such grant be made available for the maintenance of such program, and will in no event supplant such State, local, or other non-Federal funds. Xo grant shall be made under this section until the Secretary has consulted with the appropriate official as designated by the Governor or Governors of the State 
or States affected. 

490 
PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. 
Limitation. 
" (c) Xot more than 10 per centum of the total of funds appropriated or allocated for the purposes of subsection (a) of this section shall be granted for air pollution control programs in any one State. In the case of a grant for a program in an area crossing State boundaries, the Secretary shall determine the portion of such grant that is chargeable to the percentage limitation under this subsection for each State into which such area extends. 
"INTERST A TE AIR QUALITY AGENCIES OR COMMISSIONS 
"SEC, 106. (a) For the purpose of expediting the establishment of air quality standards in an interstate air quality control region designated pursuant to section 107(a)(2), the Secretary is authorized to pay, for two years, up to 100 per centum of the air quality planning program costs of any agency designated by the Governors of the affected States, which agency shall be capable of recommending to the Governors standards of air quality and plans for implementation thereof and shall include representation from the States and appropriate political subdivisions within the air quality control region. After tlie initial two-year period the Secretary is authorized to make grants to such agency in an amount up to three-fourths of the air quality planning program costs of such agency, 
"(b) (1) Whenever the Secretary deems it necessary to expedite the establishment of standards for an interstate air quality control region designated pursuant to section 107(a) (2) he may, after consultation with the Governors of the affected States, designate or establish an air quality planning commission for the purpose of developing recommended regulations setting forth standards of air quality to be applicable to such air quality control region. 
"(2) Such Commission shall consist of the Secretary or his designee who shall serve as Chairman, and adequate representation of appropriate State, interstate, local and (when appropriate), international, interests in the designated air quality control region. 
"(3) The Secretary shall, within available funds, provide such staff for such (Commission as may be necessary to enable it to carry out its functions ert'ectively, and shall pay the other expenses of the Commission ; and may also accept for the use by such Commission, funds, property, or services contributed by the State involved or political subdivisions thereof. 
"(4) Each appointee from a State, other than an official or employee thereof, or of any political subdivision thereof, shall, while engaged in the work of the Commission, receive compensation at a rate fixed by the Secretary, but not in excess of $100 per diem, including traveltime, and while away from his home or regular place of business, he may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law^ (5 U.S.C. 3109) for persons in the Government service employed intermittently. 
"AIR QUALITY CONTROL REGIONS, CRITERIA, AND CONTROL TECHNIQUES 
"SEC. 107. (a) (1) The Secretary shall, as soon as practicable, but not later than one year after the date of enactment of the Air Quality Act of 1967, define for the purposes of this Act, atmospheric areas of the Nation on the basis of those conditions, including, but not limited to, climate, meteorology, and topography, which affect the interchange and dift'usion of pollutants in the atmosphere. 
"(2) For the purpose of establishing ambient air quality standards pursuant to section 108, and for administrative and other purposes, the Secretary, after consultation with appropriate State and local authorities shall, to the extent feasible, within 18 months after the date of 
Compensation, travel expenses. 
80 Stat. 416. 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 
491 
enactment of the Air Quality Act of 1967 designate air quality control regions based on jurisdictional boundaries, urban-industrial concentrations, and other factors including atmospheric areas necessary to provide adequate implementation of air quality standards. The Secretary may from time to time thereafter, as he determines necessary to protect the public health and welfare and after consultation with appropriate State and local authorities, revise the designation of such regions and designate additional air quality control regions. 
The Secretary shall immediately notify the Governor or Governors of the affected State or States of such designation. 
''(b)(1) The Secretary shall, after consultation with appropriate advisory committees and Federal departments and agencies, from time to time, but as soon as practicable, develop and issue to the States such criteria of air quality as in his judgment may be requisite for the protection of the public health and welfare: Provided. That any criteria issued prior to enactment of this section shall be reevaluated in accordance with the consultation procedure and other provisions of this section and, if necessary, modified and reissued. Such issuance shall be announced in the Federal Register and copies shall be made available to the general public. 
" (2) Such criteria shall accurately reflect the latest scientific knowledge useful in indicating the kind and extent of all indentifiable effects on health and welfare which may be expected from the presence of an air pollution agent, or combination of agents in the ambient air, in varying quantities. 
"(3) Such criteria shall include those variable factors which of themselves or in combination with other factors may alter the effects on public health and welfare of any subject agent or combination of agents, including, but not limited to, atmospheric conditions, and the types of air pollution agent or agents w^hich, when present in the atmosphere, may interact with such subject agent or agents, to produce an adverse effect on public health and welfare. 
pfH"^^ai"'Re°"s|"r 
"(c) The Secretary shall, after consultation with appropriate advisory committees and Federal departments and agencies, issue to the States and appropriate air pollution control agencies information on those recommended pollution control techniques the application of which is necessary to achieve levels of air quality set forth in criteria issued pursuant to subsection (b), including those criteria subject to the proviso in subsection ( b ) ( 1 ) , which information shall include technical data relating to the technology and costs of emission control. Such recommendations shall include such data as are available on the latest available technology and economic feasibility of alternative methods of prevention and control of air contamination including cost-effectiveness analyses. Such issuance shall be announced in the Frde'^i\'^Re°"ster P^'ederal Register and copies shall be made available to the general 
public. 
"(d) The Secretary shall, from time to time, revise and reissue material issued pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) in accordance with procedures established in such subsections. 
"AIR QUALITY STANDARDS AND ABA'O:MENT or AIR POLIX'TION 
"SEC. 108. (a) The pollution of the air in any State or States which endangers the health or welfare of any persons, shall be subject to abatement as provided in this section. 
" (b) Consistent with the policy declaration of this title, municipal, State, and interstate action to abate air pollution shall be encouraged and shall not be displaced by Federal enforcement action except as otherwise provided by or pursuant to a court order under subsection (c),(h),or(k). 
^ "^'^ 
*^^^ ^'' 

492 
PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. 
m^bersf^' ^°^'^ 
•'(c')(l) If, Mt'ter receivingany air (![ualitY criteria and recommended control teclmiques issued pursuant to section 107, the Governor of a State, within ninety days of such receipt, files a letter of intent that such State will within one hundred and eighty days, and from time to time thereafter, adopt, after public hearings, ambient air quality standards applicable to any designated air quality control region or portions thereof within such State and within one hundred and eighty days thereafter, and from time to time as may be necessary, adopts a plan for the implementation, maintenance, and enforcement of such standards of air quality adopted, and if such standards and plan are established in accordance with the letter of intent and if the Secretary determines that such State standards are consistent with the air quality criteria and reconmiended control techniques issued pursuant to section 107; that the plan is consistent with the purposes of the Act insofar as it assures achievingsuch standards of air quality within a reasonable time; and that a means of enforcement by State action, including authority comparable to that in subsection (k) of this section, is provided, such State standards and plan shall be the air quality standards applicable to such State. If the Secretary determines that any revised State standards and plan are consistent with the purposes of this Act and this subsection, such standards and plan shall be the air quality standards applicable to such State. 
"(2) If a State does not (A) file a letter of intent or (B) establish air quality standards in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection with respect to any air quality control region or portion thereof and if the Secretary finds it necessary to achieve the purpose of this Act, or the Governor of any State affected by air quality standards established pursuant to this subsection petitions for a revision in such standards, the Secretary may after reasonable notice and a conference of representatives of appropriate Federal departments and agencies, interstate agencies, States, municipalities, and industries involved, prepare regulations setting .forth standards of air quality consistent with the air quality criteria and recommended control techniques issued pui"suant to section 107 to be applicable to such air quality control region or portions thereof. If, within six months from the date the 
Secretary publishes such regulations, the State has not adopted air quality standards found by the Secretary to be consistent with the purposes of this Act, or a petition for public hearing has not been filed under paragraph (3) of this subsection, the Secretary shall promulgate such standards. 
"(^) ^^ ^^' ^^^J ti^^ pi'ior to thirty days after standards have been promulgated under paragraph (2) of this sulbsection, the (jOA^ernor of any State aff'ected by such standards petitions the Secretai'y for a hearing, the Secretary shall call a public hearing for the purpose of receiving testimony from State and local pollution control agencies and other interested parties affected by the proposed standards, to be held in or near one or more of the places where the air quality standards will take effect, before a hearing board of five or more persons appointed by the Secretary. Each State which would be affected by such standards shall be given an opportunity to select a member of the hearing board. Each Federal department, agency, or instrumentality having a substantial interest in the subject matter as determined by the Secretary shall be given an opportunity to select one member of the hearing board and not less than a majority of the hearing board shall be persons other than ojHicers or employees of the Department of 
tr^v°eT^e^"en*ses' Health, Education, and Welfare. The members of the board who are not officers or employees of the United States, while participating in the hearing conducted by such hearing board or otherwise engaged in the work of such hearing board, shall be entitled to receive compensation at a rate fixed by the Secretary, but not exceeding $100 per diem, 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 
493 
including traveltime, and while away from their homes or regular places of business they may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703, title 5, of the United States Code for persons in the Government service employed intermittently. At least thirty days prior to the date of such hearing notice of such hearing shall be published in the Federal Register and given to parties notified of the conference required in paragraph (2) of this subsection. On the basis of the evidence presented at such hearing, the hearing board shall within ninety days unless the Secretary determines a longer period is necessary, but in no event longer than one hundred and eighty days, make findings as to whether the standards published or promulgated by the Secretary should be approved or modified and transmit its findings to the Secretary. If the hearing board approves the standards as published or promulgated by the Secretary, the standards shall take effect on receipt by the Secretary of the hearing board's recommendations. If the hearmg board recommends modifications in the standards as published or promulgated by the Secretary, the Secretary shall promulgate revised regulations setting forth standards of air quality in accordance with the hearing board's recommendations which will become efl'ective immediately upon promulgation. 
"(4) Whenever, on the basis of surveys, studies and reports, the Secretary finds that the ambient air quality of any air quality control region or portion thereof is below the air quality standards established under this subsection, and he finds that such lowered air quality results from the failure of a State to take reasonable action to enforce such standards, the Secretary shall notify the affected State or States, persons contributing to the alleged violation, and other interested parties of the violation of such standards. If such failure does not cease w^ithin one hundred and eighty days from the date of the Secretary's notification, the Secretary— 
"(i) in the case of pollution of air which is endangering the health or welfare of persons in a State other than that in which the discharge or discharges (causing or contributing to such pollution) originate, may request the Attorney General to bring a suit on behalf of the United States in the appropriate United States district court to secure abatement of the pollution. 
"(ii) in the case of pollution of air which is endangering the health or welfare of persons only in the State in which the discharge or discharges (causing or contributing to such pollution) originate, at the request of the Governor of such State, shall provide such technical and other assistance as in his judgment is necessary to assist the State in judicial proceedings to secure abatement of the pollution under State or local law, or, at the request of the Governor of such State, shall request the Attorney General to bring suit on behalf of the United States in the appropriate United States district court to secure abatement of the pollution. 
In any suit brought under the provisions of this subsection the court shall receive in evidence a transcript of the proceedings of the hearing provided for in this subsection, together with the recommendations of the hearing board and the recommendations and standards promulgated by the Secretary, and such additional evidence, including that relating to the alleged violation of the standards, as it deems necessary to complete revieW of the standards and to determination of all other issues relating to the alleged violation. The court, giving due consideration to the practicability and to the technological and economic feasibility of complying with such standards, shall have jurisdiction to enter such judgment and orders enforcing such judgment as the public interest and the equities of the case may require. 
so stat. 499. 
^T^'l^i'i'^l^i^f^t!^, Federal Register. 
' "'" 
'""'° " 
Violations, jurisdiction. 

494 
PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. 
Conference. 
" (5) In connection with any hearings under this section no \vitness or any other person shall be required to divulge trade secrets or secret processes. 
"(6) Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the application of this section to any case to which subsection (a) of this section would be otherwise applicable. 
"(d) (1) (A) "Wlienever requested by the Governor of any State, a State air pollution control agency, or (with the concurrence of the Governor and the State air pollution control agency for the State in which the municipality is situated) the governing body of any municipality, the Secretary shall, if such request refers to air pollution which is alleged to endanger the health or welfare of persons in a State other than that in which the discharge or discharges (causing or contributing to such pollution) originate, give formal notification thereof to the air pollution control agency of the municipality w^here such discharge or discharges originate, to the air pollution control agency of the State in which such municipality is located, and to the interstate air pollution control agency, if any, in whose jurisdictional area such municipality is located, and shall call promptly a conference of such agency or agencies and of the air pollution control agencies of the municipalities which may be adversely affected by such pollution, and the air pollution control agency, if any, of each State, or for each area, in which any such numicipality is located. 
"(B) Whenever requested by the Governor of any State, a State air pollution control agency, or (with the concurrence of the Governor and the State air pollution control agency for the State in which the municipality is situated) the governing body of any municipality, the Secretary shall, if such request refers to alleged air pollution which is endangering the health or welfare of persons only in the State in which the discharge or discharges (causnig or contributing to such pollution) originate and if a municipality affected by such air pollution, or the municipality in which such pollution originates, has either made or concurred in such request, give formal notificaton thereof to the State air pollution control agency, to the air pollution control agencies of the municipality where such discharge or discharges originate, and of the municipality or municipalities alleged to be adversely affected thereby, and to any interstate air pollution control agency, whose jurisdictional area includes any such municipality and shall promptly call a conference of such agency or agencies, unless in the judgment of the Secretary, the effect of such pollution is not of such significance as to warrant exercise of Federal jurisdiction under this section. 
"(C) The Secretary may, after consultation with State officials of all affected States, also call such a conference whenever, on the basis of reports, surveys, or studies, he has reason to believe that any pollution referred to in subsection (a) is occurring and is endangering the health and welfare of persons in a State other than that in which the discharge or discharges originate. The Secretary shall invite the cooperation of any municipal. State, or interstate air pollution control agencies having jurisdiction in the affected area on any surveys or studies forming the basis of conference action. 
"(D) Whenever the Secretary, upon receipt of reports, surveys, or studies from any duly constituted international agency, has reason to believe that any pollution referred to in subsection (a) which endangers the health or welfare of persons in a foreign country is occurring, or whenever the Secretary of State requests him to do so with respect to such pollution which the Secretary of State alleges is of such a nature, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare shall give formal notification thereof to the air pollution control 
Foreign countries, participation. 

81STAT.] PUBLICLAW90-148-NOV. 21,1967 
495 
agency of the municipality where such discharge or discharges originate, to the air pollution control agency of the State in which such municipality is located, and to the interstate air pollution control agency, if any, in the jurisdictional area of which such municipality is located, and shall call promptly a conference of such agency or agencies. The Secretary shall invite the foreign country which may be adversely affected by the pollution to attend and participate in the conference, and the representative of such country shall, for the purpose of the conference and any further proceeding resulting from such conference, have all the rights of a State air pollution control agency. This subparagraph shall apply only to a foreign country which the Secretary determines has given the United States essentially the same rights with respect to the prevention or control of air pollution occurring in that country as is given that country by this subparagraph. 
"(2) The agencies called to attend such conference may bring such persons as they desire to the conference. The Secretary shall deliver to such agencies and make available to other interested parties, at least thirty days prior to any such conference, a Federal report with respect to the matters before the conference, including data and conclusions or findings (if any) ; and shall give at least thirty days' prior notice of the conference date to any such agency, and to the public by publication on at least three different days in a newspaper or newspapers of general circulation in the area. The chairman of the conference shall give interested parties an opportunity to present their views to the conference with respect to such Federal report, conclusions or findings (if any), and other pertinent information. The Secretary shall provide that a transcript be maintained of the proceedings of the conference and that a copy of such transcript be made available on request of any participant in the conference at the expense of such participant. 
"(3) Following this conference, the Secretary shall prepare and forward to all air pollution control agencies attending the conference a summary of conference discussions including (A) occurrence of air pollution subject to abatement under this Act; (B) adequacy of measures taken toward abatement of the pollution; and (C) nature of delays, if any, being encountered in abating the pollution. 
" (e) If the Secretary believes, upon the conclusion of the conference or thereafter, that effective progress toward abatement of such pollution is not being made and that the health or welfare of any persons is being endangered, he shall recommend to the appropriate State, interstate, or municipal air pollution control agency (or to all such agencies) that the necessary remedial action be taken. The Secretary shall allow at least six months from the date he makes such recommendations for the taking of such recommended action. 
Transcript of ^'^°^^^ '"^^" 
"(f) (1) If, at the conclusion of the period so allowed, such remedial ^^b^g^"^^' ^°^'"^ action or other action which in the judgment of the Secretary is rea- sonably calculated to secure abatement of such pollution has not been taken, the Secretary shall call a public hearing, to be held in or near 
one or more of the places where the discharge or discharges causing or contributing to such pollution originated, before a hearing board of five or more persons appointed by the Secretary. Each State in which any discharge causing or contributing to such pollution originates and each State claiming to be adversely affected by such pollution shall be given an opportunity to select one member of such hearing board and each Federal department, agency, or instrumentality having a substantial interest in the subject matter as determined by the Secretary shall be given an opportunity to select one member of such hearing board, and one member shall be a representative of the appropriate interstate air pollution agency if one exists, and not less 
85-622 0-68—34 

4% 
PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. 
than a majority of such hearing board shall be persons other than officers or employees of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. At least three weeks' prior notice of such hearing shall be given to the State, interstate, and municipal air pollution control agencies called to attend such hearing and to the alleged polluter or polluters. All interested parties shall be given a reasonaole opportunity to present evidence to such hearing board. 
" (2) On the basis of evidence presented at such hearing, the hearing board shall make findings as to whether pollution referred to in subsection (a) is occurring and whether effective progress toward abatement thereof is being made. If the hearing board finds such pollution is occurring and effective progress toward abatement thereof is not being made it shall make recommendations to the Secretary concern
ing the measures, if any, which it finds to be reasonable and suitable to secure abatement of such pollution. 
"(3) The Secretary shall send such findings and recommendations to the person or persons discharging any matter causing or contributing to such pollution; to air pollution control agencies of the State or States and of the municipality or municipalities where such discharge or discharges originate; and to any interstate air pollution control agency whose jurisdictional area includes any such municipality, together with a notice specifying a reasonable time (not less than six months) to secure abatement of such pollution. 
"(g) If action reasonably calculated to secure abatement of the pollution Avithin the time specified in the notice following the public liearing is not taken, the Secretary— 
"(1) in the case of pollution of air which is endangering the health or welfare of persons (A) in a State other than that in which the discharge or discharges (causing or contributing to such pollution) originate, or (B) in a foreign country which has participated in a conference called under subparagraph (D) of subsection (d) of this section and in all proceedings under this section resulting from such conference, may request the Attorney General to bring a suit on behalf of the United States in the appropriate United States district court to secure abatement of the pollution. 
"(2) in the case of pollution of air which is endangering the health or welfare of persons only in the State in which the discharge or discharges (causing or contributing to such pollution) originate, at the request of the Governor of such State, shall provide such technical and other assistance as in his judgment is necessary to assist the State in judicial proceedings to secure abatement of the pollution under State or local law or, at the request of the Governor of such State, shall request the Attorney General to bring suit on behalf of the United States in the appro
priate United States district court to secure abatement of the 
pollution. "(h) The court shall receive in evidence in any suit brought in a 
LTnited States court under subsection (g) of this section a transcript of the proceedings before the board and a copy of the board's recommendations and shall receive such further evidence as the court in its discretion deems proper. The court, giving due consideration to the practicability of complying with such standards as may be applicable and to the physical and economic feasibility of securing abatement of any pollution proved, shall have jurisdiction to enter such judgment, and orders enforcing such judgment, as the public interest and the equities of the case may require. 
"(i) Members of any hearing board appointed pursuant to subsection (f) who are not regular full-time officers or employees of the 
Jurisdiction. 
Compensation, travel expenses. 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 
497 
United States shall, while participating in the hearing conducted by such board or otherwise engaged on the work of such board, be entitled to receive compensation at a rate fixed by the Secretary, but not exceeding $100 per diem, including traveltime, and while away from their homes or regular places of business they may be alloAved travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law (5 IT.S.C. 73b-2) for persons in the Government service employed intermittently. ^ 
"(j) (1) In connection with any conference called under this section, the Secretary is authorized to require any person whose activities result in the emission of air pollutants causing or contributing to air pollution to file with him, in such form as he may prescribe, a report, based on existing data, furnishing to the Secretary such information as may reasonably be required as to the character, kind, and quantity of pollutants discharged and the use of devices or other means to prevent or reduce the emission of pollutants by the person filing such a report. After a conference has been held with respect to any such pollution the Secretary shall require such reports from the person whose activities result in such pollution only to the extent recommended by such conference. Such report shall be made under oath or otherwise, as the Secretary may prescribe, and shall be filed with the Secretary within such reasonable period as the Secretary may prescribe, unless additional time be granted by the Secretary. No person shall be required in such report to divulge trade secrets or secret l)rocesses and all information reported shall be considered confidential for the purposes of section 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code. 
"(2) If any person required to file any report under this subsection sliall fail to do so within the time fixed by the Secretary for filing the same, and such failure shall continue for thirty days after notice of such default, such person shall forfeit to the United States the sum of $100 for each and every day of the continuance of such failure, which forfeiture shall be payable into the Treasury of the United States, and shall be recoverable in a civil suit in the name of the United States brought in the district where such person has his principal office or in any district in w^hich he does business: Provided, That the Secretary' 
may upon application therefor remit or mitigate any forfeiture provided for under this subsection and he shall have authority to determine the facts upon all such applications. 
''(8) It shall be the duty of the various Ignited States attorneys, inider the direction of the Attorney General of the L^nited States, to prosecute for the recovery of such forfeitures. 
" (k) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Secretary, upon receipt of evidence that a particular pollution source or combination of sources (including moving sources) is presenting an imminent and substantial endangerment to the health of persons, and finding that appropriate State or local authorities have not acted to abate such sources, may request the Attorney General to bring suit on behalf of the United States in the appropriate United States district court to immediately enjoin any contributor to the alleg^ed pollution to stop the emission of contaminants causing such pollution or to take such other action as may be necessary. 
"STANDARDS TO ACHIEVE HIGHER LEVEL OF AIR Ql'ALITT 
"SEC. 109. Nothing in this title shall prevent a State, political subdivision, intermunicipal or interstate agency from adopting standards and plans to implement an air quality program which will achieve a higher level of ambient air quality than approved by the Secretary. 
^° ^*^*'^^^• s use 5703. 
62 stat. 791. 

498 PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. ^'PRESIDEXT'S AlU y i A M T Y ADVISORY liOARD AND ADVISORY COMMITTEES 
Membership. 
"SEC. 110. (a) (1) There is hereby established in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare an Air Quality Advisory Board, composed of the Secretary or his designee, who shall be dhairman, and fifteen members appomted by the President, none of whom shall be Federal officers or employees. The appointed members, having due regard for the purposes of this Act, shall be selected from among representatives of various State, interstate, and local governmental agencies, of public or private interests contributing to, affected by, or concerned with air pollution, and of other public and private agencies, organizations, or groups demonstrating an active interest in the field of air pollution prevention and control, as well as other individuals who are expert in this field. 
" (2) Each member appointed by the President shall hold office for a term of three years, except that (A) any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which his predecessor was appointed shall be appointed for the remainder of such term, and (B) the terms of office of the members first taking office jjursuant to this subsection shall expire as follows: five at the end of one year after the date of appointment, five at the end of two years after such date, and five at the end of three years after such date, as designated by the President at the time of appointment, and (C) the term of any member under the preceding provisions shall be extended until the date on which his successor's appointment is effective. None of the members shall be eligible for reappointment within one year after the end of his preceding temi, unless such term was for less than three yea.rs. 
"(b) The Board shall advise and consult with the Secretary on matters of policy relating to the activities and functions of the Secretary under this Act and nuike such recommendations as it deems necessary to the President. 
"(c) Such clerical and technical assistance as may be necessary to discharge the duties of the Board and such other advisory committees as hereinafter authorized shall be provided from the personnel of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 
"(d) In order to obtain assistance in the development and implementation of the purposes of this Act including air quality criteria, recommended control techniques, standards, research and development, and to encourage the continued efforts on the part of industry to improve air quality and to develop economically feasible methods for the control and abatement of air pollution, the Secretary shall from time to time establish advisory committees. Committee members shall include, but not be limited to, persons who are knowledgeable concerning air quality from the standpoint of health, welfare, economics, or technology. 
"(e) The members of the Board and other advisory committees appointed pursuant to this Act who are not officers or employees of the United States while attending conferences or meetings of the Board or while otherwise serving at the request of the Secretary, shall be entitled to receive compensation at a rate to be fixed by the Secretary, but not exceeding $100 per diem, including traveltime, and while away from their homes or regular places of business they may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5 of the United States Code for persons in the Government service employed intermittently. 
Term of office. 
Compensation, travel expenses. 
80 Stat. 499. 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 499 
"COOPERATIOX BY FEDERAL AGENCIES TO CONTROL AIR POLLUTION FROM FEDERAL FACILITIES 
"SEC. 111. (a) It is hereby declared to be the intent of Congress that any Federal department or agency having jurisdiction over any building, installation, or other property shall, to the extent practicable and consistent with the interests of the L'nited States and within any available appropriations, cooperate with the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and with any air pollution control agency in preventing and controlling the pollution of the air in any area insofar as the discharge of any matter from or by such building, installation, or other property may cause or contribute to pollution of the air in such area. 
'' (b) In order to control air pollution which may endanger the health or welfare of any persons, the Secretary may establish classes of po- tential pollution sources for which an}^ Federal department or agency liaving jurisdiction over any building, installation, or other property shall, before discharging any matter into the air of the United States, obtain a permit from the Secretary for such discharge, such permits to be issued for a specified period of time to be determined by the Secre- tary and subject to revocation if the Secretary finds pollution is endangering the health and welfare of any persons. In connection with the issuance of such permits, there shall be submitted to the Secretary such plans, specifications, and other information as he deems relevant thereto and under such conditions as he may prescribe. The Secretary cc!^^gfesV° shall report each January to the Congress the status of such permits and compliance therewith. 
"TITLE II—NATIONAL EMISSION STANDAKDS ACT "SHORT TITLE 
"SEC. 201. This title may be cited as the 'National Emission Standards Act'. 
"ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS 
"SEC. 202. (a) The Secretary shall by regulation, giving appropriate consideration to technological feasibility and economic costs, prescribe as soon as practicable standards, applicable to the emission of any kind of substance, from any class or classes of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines, which in his judgment cause or contribute to, or are likely to cause or to contribute to, air pollution which endangers the health or welfare of any persons, and such standards shall apply to such vehicles or engines whether they are designed as complete systems or incorporate other devices to prevent or control such pollution. 
"(b) Any regulations initially prescribed under this section, and amendments thereto, with respect to any class oi new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines shall become effective on the effective date specified in the order promulgating such regulations which date shall be determined by the Secretary after consideration of the period reasonably necessary for industry compliance. 
"PROHIBITED ACTS 
"SEC. 203. (a) The following acts and the causing thereof are prohibited— 
" (1) in the case of a manufacturer of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines for distribution in commerce, the manufacture for sale, the sale, or the offering for sale, or the introduction or delivery for introduction into commerce, or the importation into the United States for sale or resale, of any new motor 
Effective date of regulations. 

500 
PUBLIC LAW 90-14S-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. 
veliicle or new motor veliicle engine, manufactured after the etfective date of regulations under this title which are applicable to such vehicle or engine unless it is in conformity with regulations prescribed under this title (except as provided in subsection 
''(2) for any person to fail or refuse to permit access to or copying of records or to fail to make reports or provide information, required under section 207; or 
"(3) for any person to remove or render inoperative any device or element of design installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine in compliance with regulations under this title prior to its sale and delivery to the ultimate purchaser. 
^^ {h) (1) The Secretary may exempt any new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine, or class thereof, from subsection (a), upon such terms and conditions as he may find necessary to protect the public health or welfare, for the purpose of research, investigations, studies, demonstrations, or training, or for reasons of national security. 
"•(2) A new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine offered for impoi-tation by a manufacturer in violation of subsection (a) shall be refused admission into the United States, but the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare may, by joint regulation, provide for deferring final determination as to admission and authorizing the delivery of such a motor vehicle or engine offered for import to the owner or consignee thereof upon such terms and conditions (including the furnishing of a bond) as may appear to them appropriate to insure that any such motor vehicle or engine will be brought into conformity with the standards, requirements, and limitations applicable to it under this title. The Secretary of the Treasury shall, if a motor vehicle or engine is finally refused admission under this paragraph, cause disposition thereof in accordance with tlie customs laws unless it is exported, under regulations prescribed by such Secretary, within ninety days of the date of notice of such refusal or such additional time as may be permitted pursuant to such regulations, except that disposition in accordance with the customs laws may not be made in such manner as may result, directly or indirectly, in the sale, to the ultimate consumer, of a new 
motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine that fails to comply with a])plicable standards of the Secretary of Health, Education, and AVelfare under this title. 
•'(3) A new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine intended solely for export, and so labeled or tagged on the outside of the container and on the vehicle or engine itself, shall not be subject to the provisions of subsection ( a ) . 
"INJUXCTTOX rROCKKDIXGS 
"SEC. 204. (a) The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to restrain violations of paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of section 203(a). 
"(b) Actions to restrain such violations shall be brought by and in the name of the United States. In any such action, subpenas for witnesses who are required to attend a district court in any district may run into any other district. 
"PENAL TIES 
"SEC. 205. Any person who violates paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of section 203(a) shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000. Such violation with respect to sections 203(a) (1) and 203(a) (3) shall constitute a separate offense witli respect to each new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine. 
Exemptions. 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 
501 
"(JERTinCA TION 
"SEC. 206. (a) Upon a]jplication of tlie manufacturer, the Secretary shall test, or require to be tested, in such manner as he deems appropriate, any new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine submitted by such manufacturer to determine whether such vehicle or engine conforms with the regulations prescribed under section 202 of this title. If such vehicle or engine conforms to such regulations the Secretary shall issue a certificate of conformity, upon such terms, and for such period not less than one year, as he may prescribe. 
"(b) Any new motor vehicle or any motor vehicle engine sold by such manufacturer which is in all material respects substantially the same construction as the test vehicle or engine for which a certificate has been issued under subsection (a), shall for the purposes of this Act be deemed to be in confonnity with the regulations issued under section 202 of this title. 
"RECORDS AND REPORTS 
"SEC. 207. (a) Every manufacturer shall establish and maintain such records, make such reports, and provide such information as the Secretary may reasonably require to enable him to determine whether such manufacturer has acted or is acting in compliance with this title and regulations thereunder and shall, upon request of an officer or employee duly designated by the Secretary, permit such officer or employee at reasonable times to have access to and copy such records. 
"(b) All information reported or otherwise obtained by the Secretary or his representative pursuant to subsection (a), which information contains or relates to a trade secret or other matter referred to in section 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code, shall be considered confidential for the purpose of such section 1905, except that such information may be disclosed to other officers or employees concerned with carrying out this Act or when relevant in any proceeding under this Act. Nothing in this section shall authorize the withholding of information by the Secretary or any officer or employee under his control, from the duly authorized committees of the Congress. 
"STATE STANDARDS 
"SEC. 208. (a) No State or any political subdivision thereof shall adopt or attempt to enforce any standard relating to the control of emissions from new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines subject to this title. No State shall require certification, inspection, or any other approval relating to the control of emissions from any new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine as condition precedent to the initial retail sale, titling (if any), or registration of such motor vehicle, motor vehicle engine, or equipment. 
"(b) The Secretary^ shall, after notice and opportunity for public hearing, waive application of this section to any State which has adopted standards (other than crankcase emission standards) for the control of emissions from new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines prior to March 30, 1966, unless he finds that such State does not require standards more stringent than applicable Federal standards to meet compelling and extraordinary conditions or that such State standards and accompanying enforcement procedures are not consistent with section 202(a) of this title. 
"(c) Nothing in this title shall preclude or deny to any State or political subdivision thereof the right otherwise to control, regulate, or restrict the use, operation, or movement of registered or licensed motor vehicles. 
" s*^*^^i

502 
PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. "FEDERAL ASSISTANCE IX DE\ELOPIXG YEfllCLE IXSPECTIOX TKOGRAMS 
"SEC. 209. The Secretary is authorized to make grants to appropriate State air pollution control agencies in an amount up to twothirds of tlie cost of developing meaningful uniform motor vehicle emission device inspection and emission testing programs except that 
(1) no grant shall be made for any part of any State vehicle inspection program which does not directly relate to the cost of the air pollution control aspects of such a program; and (2) no such grant shall be made unless the Secretary of Transportation has certified to the Secretary that such program is consistent with any highway safety program developed pursuant to section 402 of title 23 of the L'nited States Code. 
"•REGISTRA TION OF F U E L ADDITIVES 
"SEC. 210. (a) The Secretary may by regulation designate any fuel or fuels (including fuels used for purposes other than motor vehicles), and after such date or dates as may be prescribed by him, no manufacturer or processor of any such fuel may deliver any such fuel for introduction into interstate commerce or to another person who, it can reasonably be expected, will deliver such fuel for such introduction unless the manufacturer of such fuel has provided the Secretary with the information required under subsection (b) (1) of this section and unless any additive contained in such fuel has been registered with the Secretary in accordance with subsection (b) (2) of this section. 
"(b) For the purposes of this section the Secretary shall require (1) tlie manufacturer of such fuel to notify him as to the commercial identifying name and manufacturer of any additive contained in such fuel; the range of concentration of such additive or additives in the fuel; and the purpose in the use of such additive; and (2) the manufacturer of any such additive to notify him as to the chemical composition of such additive or additives as indicated by compliance with clause (1) above, the recommended range of concentration of such additive, if any, the recommended purpose in the use of such additive, and to the extent such information is available or becomes available, 
the chemical structure of such additive or additives. Upon compliance with clauses (1) and (2), including assurances that any change in the above information will be provided to the Secretary, the Secretary shall register such fuel additive. 
" (c) All information reported or otherwise obtained by the Secretary or his representative pursuant to subsection (b), which information contains or relates to a trade secret or other matter referred to in section 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code, shall be considered confidential for the purpose of such section 1905, except that such information may be disclosed to other officers or employees of the United States concerned with carrying out this Act or when relevant in any proceeding under this title. Nothing in this section shall authorize the withholding of information by the Secretary or any officer or employee under his control, from the duly authorized committees of the Congress, 
"(^) Any person who violates subsection (a) shall forfeit and pay to the United States a civil penalty of $1,000 for each and every day of the continuance of such violation, which shall accrue to the United States and be recovered in a civil suit in the name of the United States, brought in the district where such person has his principal office or in any district in which he does business. The Secretary may, upon app^lication therefor, remit or mitigate any forfeiture provided for in this subsection, and he shall have authority to determine the facts upon all such applications. 
80 Stat. 731. 
62 Stat. 791. 
^r/tfe^"^' 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 
503 
"(e) It shall be the duty of the various Lliited States attorneys, under the direction of the Attorney General of the United States, to prosecute for the recovery of such forfeitures. 
"XA TIOXAL EMISSIONS STAXDARDS STUDY 
"SEC. 211. (a) The Secretary shall submit to the Congress, no later than tM'o years after the effective date of this section, a comprehensive report on the need for and effect of national emission standards for stationary sources. Such report shall include: (A) information regarding identifiable health and welfare effects from single emission sources; 
(B) examples of specific plants, their location, and the contaminant or contaminants which, due to the amount or nature of emissions from such facilities, constitute a danger to public health or welfare; (C) an up-to-date list of those industries and the contaminant or contaminants which, in his opinion, should be subject to such national standards; (D) the relationship of such national emission standards to ambient air quality, including a comparison of situations wherein several plants emit the same contaminants in an air region with those in which only one such plant exists; (E) an analysis of the cost of applying such standards; and {¥) such other information as may be appropriate. 
"(b) The Secretary shall conduct a full and complete investig*ation and study of the feasibility and practicability of controlling emissions from jet and piston aircraft engines and of establishing national emission standards wdth respect thereto, and report to Congress the results of such study and investigation within one year from the date of enactment of the Air Quality Act of 1967, together with his recommendations. 
"DEFINITIOXS FOR TITLE II 
"SEC. 212. As used in this title— 
"(1) The term 'manufacturer' as used in sections 208, 206, 207, and 208 means any person engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of new motor vehicles or new^ motor vehicle engines, or importing such vehicles or engines for resale, or who acts for and is under the control of any such person in connection with the distribution of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines, but shall not include any dealer with respect to new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines received by him in commerce. 
"(2) The term 'motor vehicle' means any self-propelled vehicle designed for transporting persons or property on a street or highAvay, "(3) The term 'new motor vehicle' means a motor vehicle the equitable or legal title to which has never been transferred to an ultimate purchaser; and the term 'new motor vehicle engine' means an engine in a new motor vehicle or a motor vehicle engine the equitable or legal 
title to which has never been transferred to the ultimate purchaser. "(4) The term 'dealer' means any person Avho is engaged in the sale or the distribution of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines 
to the ultimate purchaser. "(5) The term 'ultimate purchaser' means, with respect to any new 
motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine, the first person who in good faith purchases such new motor vehicle or new engine for purposes other than resale. 
"(6) The term 'commerce' means (A) commerce betAveen any place in any State and any place outside thereof; and (B) commerce wholly within the District ot Columbia. 
cfrT'Jes^!" 

504 
PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. 
42u?c lis' 60 Stat. 423. 
"TITLE III—GENERAL "ADMINISTRA TION 
"SEC. 301. (a) The Secretary is authorized to prescribe such reguJations as are necessary to carry out his functions under this Act. Tlie Secretary may delegate to any officer or employee of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare such of his powei-s and duties under this Act, except the making of regulations, as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
" (b) Upon the request of an air pollution control agency, personnel of the Public Health Service may be detailed to such agency for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. The provisions of section 214(d) of the Public Health Service Act shall be applicable with respect to any personnel so detailed to the same extent as if such persouuel had been detailed under section 214(b) of that Act. 
"(c) Payments under grants made under this Act may be made in installments, and in advance or by way of reimbursement, as may be determined by the Secretary. 
"DEFINITIONS 
"SEC. 302. When used in this Act— 
"(a) The term 'Secretary' means the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare. 
"(b) The term 'air pollution control agency' means any of the following: 
" (1) A single State agency designated by the Governor of that State as the official State air pollution control agency for purposes of this Act; 
"(2) An agency established by two or more States and having substantial powers or duties pertaining to the prevention and control of air pollution; 
" (3) A city, county, or other local government health authority, or, in the case of any city, county, or other local government m which there is an agency other than the health authority charged with responsibility for enforcing ordinances or laws relating to the prevention and control of air pollution, such other agency; or 
"(4) An agency of two or more municipalities located in the same State or in different States and having substantial powers or duties pertaining to the prevention and control of air pollution. 
" (c) The term 'interstate air pollution control agency' means— " (1) an air pollution control agency established by two or more 
States, or 
"(2) an air pollution control agency of two or more municipalities located in. different States. 
"(d) The term 'State' means a State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Kico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa. 
" (e) The term 'person' includes an individual, corporation, partnership, association, State, municipality, and political subdivision of a State. 
"(f) The term 'municipality' means a city, town, borough, county, parish, district, or other public body created by or pursuant to State law. 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 
505 
"(g) All language referring to adverse effects on welfare shall include but not be limited to injury to agricultural crops and livestock, damage to and the deterioration of property, and hazards to transportation. 
"OTHER AUTHORITY NOT AFFECTED 
"SEC. 303. (a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, this Act shall not be construed as superseding or limiting the authorities and responsibilities, under any other provision of law, of the Secretary or any other Federal officer, department, or agency, 
"(b) Xo appropriation shall be authorized or made under section 301, 311, or 314 of the Public Health Service Act for any fiscal year after the fiscal year ending June 30, 1964, for any purpose for which appropriations may be made under authority of this Act. 
"RECORDS AND AUDIT 
"SEC. 304. (a) Each recipient of assistance under this Act shall keep such records as the Secretary shall prescribe, including records which fully disclose the amount and disposition by such recipient of the proceeds of such assistance, the total cost of the project or undertaking in connection with Avhich such assistance is given or used, and the amount of that portion of the cost of the project or undertaking supplied by other sources, and such other records as will facilitate an effective audit. 
"(b) The Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare and the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized representatives, shall have access for the purpose of audit and examinations to any books, documents, papers, and records of the recipients that are pertinent to the grants received under this Act. 
"COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COST SIX'DIES 
"SEC. 305. (a) In order to provide the basis for evaluating programs authorized by this Act and the development of new programs and to furnish tlie Congress with the information necessary for authorization of appropriations by fiscal years beginning after June 30, 1969, the Secretary, in cooperation with State, interstate, and local air pollution control agencies, shall make a detailed estimate of the cost of carrying out the provisions of this Act; a comprehensive study of the cost of program implementation by affected units of government ; and a comprehensive study of the economic impact of air quality .standards on the Xation's industries, communities, and other contributing sources of pollution, including an analysis of the national 
58 Stat. 691; 80 Stat. 118 1, 1190. 
^^^ ^^^ 241, 
requirements for and the cost of controlling emissions to attain such standards of air quality as may be established pursuant to this Act or applicable State law. The Secretary shall submit such detailed esti- mate and the results of such comprehensive study of cost for the five°"^''^^^' year period beginning July 1,1969, and the results of such other studies, 
to the Congress not later than January 10, 1969, and shall submit a reevaluation of such estimate and studies annually thereafter. 
"(b) The Secretary shall also make a complete investigation and study to determine (1) the need for additional trained State and local personnel to carry out programs assisted pursuant to this Act 
Reportto 
Personnel study. 

506 
PUBLIC LAW 90-148-NOV. 21, 1967 [81 STAT. 
Report to Presi
iiiid other programs for the same purpose as this Act; (2) means of lising existing Federal training programs to train such personnel; and (3) the need for additional trained personnel to develop, operate and maintain those pollution control facilities designed and installed to implement air quality standards. He shall report the results of such 
dent and Congress. investigation and study to the President and the Congress not later than July 1, 1969. 
63 Stat. 108. 
"ADDITIONAL REPORTS TO CONGRESS 
"SEC. 306. Xot later than six months after the effective date of this section and not later than January 10 of each calendar year beginning after such date, the Secretary shall report to the Congress on measures taken toward implementing the purpose and intent of this Act including, but not limited to, (1) the progress and problems associated with control of automotive exhaust emissions and the research efforts related thereto; (2) the development of air quality criteria and recommended emission control requirements; (3) the status of enforcement actions taken pursmint to this Act; (4) the status of State ambient air standards setting, including such plans for implementation and enforcement as have been developed; (5) the extent of development and expansion of air pollution monitoring systems; (6) progress and problems related to development of new and improved control techniques; (7) the development of quantitative and qualitative instrumentation to monitor emissions and air quality; (8) standards set or under consideration pursuant to title II of this Act; (9) the status of State, interstate, and local pollution control programs established pursuant to and assisted by this Act; and (^10) the reports and recommendations made by the President's Air Quality Advisory Board. 
*'LAHOR STANDARDS 
•'SEC. 307, The Secretary shall take such action as may be necessary to insure that all laborers and mechanics employed by contractors or subcontractors on projects assisted under this Act shall be paid wages at rates not less than those ])revailing for the same type of work on similar construction in tlie locality as determined by the Secretary of 
Labor, in accordance with the Act of March 3,1931, as amended, known as the Davis-l^acon Act (46 Stat. U94; 40 U.S.C. 276a—276a-5). The Secretary of Labor shall have, with respect to the labor standards specified in this subsection, the authority and functions set forth in Reorganization Plan Numbered 14 of 1950 (15 F.R. 3176; 64 Stat. 1267) and section 2 of the Act of June 13, 1934, as amended (48 Stat. 1)48; 40 U.S.C. 276c). 
''SEl'AR ABILITY 
"SEC. 308. If any provision of this Act, or the a])])lication of any [)rovision of this Act to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the application of such provision to other i)ersons or circumstances, and the remainder of this Act, shall not be affected thereby. 
"AIM'ROrRIA'lTONS 
"SEC. 309. TJiere are herebv authorized to be appropriated to carry out tliis Act, other than sectK)ns 103(d) and 104, $74,000,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1968, $95,000,000 for the fiscal year ending 

81 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 90-150-NOV. 24, 1967 
507 
June 30, 1969, and $134,300,000 for the fiscal vear ending June 30, 1970. 
"SHORT TTTLE 
•'SEC. 310. This Act may be cited as the 'Clean Air Act'." Approved November 21, 1967. 
Public Law 90-149 
A N A C T Declaring a portion of Bayou Lafourche, Louisiana, a nonnavigable waterway of the United States. 
November [H. R. 6692) 
Be it eruicted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That Bayou ^^y°"^^
Lafourche, iii the State of Louisiana, between Canal Boulevard, city of Thibodaux, Parish of Lafourche, State of Louisiana, and the head of the bayou at its junction with the Mississippi River levee at the city of Donaldsonville, Parish of Ascension, State of Louisiana, is hereby declared to be a nonnavigable waterway of the United States within the meaning of the laws of the LTnited States. The existing project for Bayou Lafourche, Louisiana, authorized by the Acts of August 30, 1935 (49 Stat. 1028) and July 14, 1960 (74 Stat. 480) is hereby deauthorized in the reach of Bayou Lafourche herein declared nonnavigable. 
SEC. 2. The right to alter, amend, or repeal this Act is hereby expressly reserved. 
Approved November 22, 1967. 
°Nonnavigabie waterway. 
Public Law 90-150 To amend the Highway Safety Act of ItmtS. 
Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, T h a t section 404 of the Highway Safety Act (23 U.S.C, 401 et seq.) is amended by— 
(1) striking subsection (a)(1) thereof and inserting in lieu thereof the following: 
November 24, 1967 I^^' ^^^^' 
^"'of'Tgee^"^^*^ amendment.' 
so stat. 733. 
AN ACT 
"(a) (1) There is established in the Department of Transportation ^jftt'e^"'^ "^""^ a National Highway Safety Advisory Committee, composed of the Secretary or an officer of the Department appointed by him, who shall be Chairman, the Federal Highway Administrator, and thirty-five 
members a})pointed by the President, no more than four of whom shall be Federal officers or employees. The appointed members, having due regard for the purposes of this chapter, shall be selected from among representatives of various State and local governments, including State legislatures, of public and private interests contributing to, affected by, or concerned with highway safety, including the national organizations of passenger car, l)us, and truck owners, and of other public and private agencies, organizations, or groups demonstrating an active interest in highway safety, as well as research scientists and other individuals who are expert in this field.*" 
(2) striking subsection (a) (2) (A) and inserting in lieu thereof the following: 
"(2) (A) Each member appointed by the President shall hold office for a term of three years, except that (i) any member appointed to fill 
22, 1967 
